@page { size: 794px 1123px; margin: 0; }
\n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n




           OPTITUDE AI
           The Periodic Table
           of AI Elements
           A comprehensive learning manual for entrepreneurs
           and business builders navigating the AI landscape


           48
           E LE M E NTS
                                    8
                                    GROUP S
                                                     1
                                                     FRA M E W ORK

           Understand the building blocks. Build the future.




           \n        \n \n              \n \n          \n \n         \n \n        \n \n        \n \n        \n \n        \n
                Tk             Td               Sp             Gp            Ap           Ag           Zp           Uc

           \n             \n              \n              \n           \n           \n           \n           \n
                Md             Em               Mm             Cl            Wh           Or           Mk           Ri

           \n             \n              \n              \n           \n           \n           \n           \n
                Pr             Vd               Mu             Gm            Ep           Wf           N8           Pe

           \n             \n              \n              \n           \n           \n           \n           \n
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements




 Table of Contents
       Part 1: The Big Picture                                                                                   2
             The High Leverage Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

       Part 2: The Eight Groups                                                                                  3

       Group 1: Fundamentals                                                                                     3

       Group 2: Data & Knowledge                                                                                 5

       Group 3: Intelligence Layer                                                                               7

       Group 4: Models & Providers                                                                               8

       Group 5: Infrastructure & Connectivity                                                                  10

       Group 6: Agents & Automation                                                                            12

       Group 7: No-Code Builder Tools                                                                          13

       Group 8: Business Layer                                                                                 15

       Part 3: Compounds                                                                                       17
             Compound 1: The Custom AI Assistant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

             Compound 2: The Automated Lead Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

             Compound 3: The Content Factory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

       Part 4: Quick Reference                                                                                 18




                                                          1
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements



 Part 1: The Big Picture
 The Periodic Table of AI Elements organises 48 essential AI concepts into 8 logical groups, mirroring how
 chemical elements build the physical world. Just as hydrogen and oxygen combine to form water, AI elements like
 Tokens, Prompts, and Models combine to form business systems. Understanding these elements individually is the
 first step; understanding how they combine is where real business value emerges.

 The table is not just a taxonomy. It is a map of leverage. Groups 1 through 4 represent the foundations: what AI is
 and how it works. Groups 5 through 7 represent the connectors and builders: how you make AI work for you.
 Group 8 ties everything back to business outcomes. The highest entrepreneurial value concentrates in Groups 5, 6,
 and 7, what we call the High Leverage Zone, because this is where AI transforms from a tool you visit into a
 system that works for you around the clock.




                                             Figure 1: The Complete Periodic Table of AI Elements




 The High Leverage Zone
 Groups 5 (Infrastructure and Connectivity), 6 (Agents and Automation), and 7 (No-Code Builder Tools) form the
 High Leverage Zone. These are the elements that let entrepreneurs build AI systems without needing to be AI
 researchers. If you want to create business value with AI, this is where you focus your time and energy. The
 foundations matter, but the leverage is here.




                                                                      2
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements




                                                  Figure 2: Where Entrepreneurial Value Lives




 Part 2: The Eight Groups
 Each group contains related elements that work together. Think of them as families in the periodic table: elements
 in the same group share characteristics and tend to combine in similar ways. We will explore each group in detail,
 with every element broken down into its symbol, definition, real-world example, key combinations, common
 mistakes, and a reflection question to test your understanding.




 Group 1: Fundamentals
 These are the atoms of everything. Nothing works without these. You will encounter every element in this group
 in literally every AI tool you ever use.




                                                          Figure 3: Group 1 Elements




                                                                      3
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements



                       Token How AI reads text, not words. ~1 token per 0.75 words. Directly affects cost, speed, and how much
         Tk            you can feed an AI at once.
        Token
                          Real-World Example: A 1,000-word email is ~1,333 tokens. At $0.03/1K tokens, that costs ~$0.04.
                         Combines with: Context Window, Model, Prompt
                         Common mistakes: Confusing tokens with words; Ignoring token costs in automations; Not truncating inputs to fit
                         context windows
                         Reflection: Can you estimate the token cost of sending a 5-page document to an AI?


                       Model The core AI engine. Different models have different strengths, costs, and capabilities. Choosing the
       Md              right one is fundamental.
        Model
                          Real-World Example: Models are like vehicle engines: a city car for short trips, a truck for heavy loads.
                          Don't use a truck to pop to the shops.
                         Combines with: Parameters, Temperature, Fine-Tuning
                         Common mistakes: Using the most expensive model for every task; Assuming all models handle every task equally;
                         Not testing smaller models first
                         Reflection: Can you name three AI models and when you would choose each?


                       Prompt Your instructions to the model. Structure determines ~80% of output quality. The most underrated
         Pr            skill for non-technical AI builders.
        Prompt
                          Real-World Example: 'Write a marketing email' gives anything. 'Write a 150-word email to SaaS founders
                          promoting a 20% AI discount, friendly-professional tone, clear CTA by Friday' gives precision.
                         Combines with: System Prompt, Temperature, RAG
                         Common mistakes: Being vague and expecting precise results; Not iterating on prompts when output is poor; Blaming
                         the model when the prompt is the issue
                         Reflection: Can you rewrite a vague prompt into a specific one and see the difference?


                       Context Window How much the model can see in a single conversation. Like short-term memory with a
        Cw             hard limit.
    Context Window
                          Real-World Example: Imagine reading a book but only remembering the last 10 pages. GPT-4's 128K
                          window holds ~96,000 words before things fade.
                         Combines with: Token, Memory, RAG
                         Common mistakes: Stuffing too much into one conversation; Not understanding why AI 'forgets'; Assuming bigger
                         windows solve all problems
                         Reflection: If your AI keeps forgetting instructions mid-conversation, which element do you investigate?


                       Temperature Controls creativity vs. predictability. Low = precise, consistent. High = creative,
        Tp             unpredictable.
     Temperature
                          Real-World Example: Legal contract clauses? Temperature near 0. Brainstorming marketing slogans? Crank
                          to 0.8+ for wild ideas.
                         Combines with: Prompt, Model, Guardrails
                         Common mistakes: Using high temperature for automated processes; Expecting identical outputs above temperature 0;
                         Not adjusting temperature when switching task types
                         Reflection: What temperature for an AI drafting customer emails vs. one writing poetry?




                                                                      4
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements



                       Parameters Internal settings that shape how a model thinks. More parameters = more capability AND more
        Pm             cost.
      Parameters
                          Real-World Example: Llama 3 8B handles everyday tasks cheaply. GPT-4 handles complex reasoning at
                          higher price.
                         Combines with: Model, Token, Fine-Tuning
                         Common mistakes: Assuming bigger is always better; Not comparing cost-effectiveness across sizes; Ignoring
                         parameter counts when estimating API costs
                         Reflection: Why might a 7B model actually be the better choice for some tasks?



     Checkpoint: You should now be able to: Explain tokens, models, prompts, context windows, temperature, and
     parameters; Estimate token costs for a given task; Choose the right model and temperature for different use cases




 Group 2: Data & Knowledge
 How you feed information into an AI system and make it smarter for your specific use case. Without these, your
 AI only knows what it was trained on.




                                                         Figure 4: Group 2 Elements



                       Training Data The information a model learned from during creation. Tells you where it is strong and
        Td             where it has blind spots.
     Training Data
                          Real-World Example: If trained on data up to Jan 2024, it literally cannot tell you about anything after that.
                         Combines with: Fine-Tuning, RAG, Embedding
                         Common mistakes: Expecting AI to know things outside its training data; Not checking cutoff dates; Assuming
                         training data is always accurate
                         Reflection: If AI gives wrong info about your company, is that a model problem or a training data problem?




                                                                      5
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements



                       Embedding How AI converts text into numbers that capture meaning. Enables semantic understanding.
        Em                Real-World Example: Like a library shelved by meaning, not alphabet. Search 'grow sales' and it finds
      Embedding
                          'revenue expansion' too.
                         Combines with: Vector Database, RAG, Training Data
                         Common mistakes: Confusing embeddings with keyword matching; Not understanding why semantic search beats
                         text search; Ignoring embedding quality in search systems
                         Reflection: Why might an embedding search find a document with none of your search words?


                       Vector Database Where embeddings are stored and searched. If you build any AI that searches information,
        Vd             you need a vector database.
    Vector Database
                          Real-World Example: A super-smart filing cabinet: search by meaning, not filename.
                         Combines with: Embedding, Knowledge Base, RAG
                         Common mistakes: Using a traditional database when vector DB is needed; Not indexing data before storing;
                         Assuming vector DBs work like keyword search
                         Reflection: If your AI can never find the right document, which element might be misconfigured?


                       Knowledge Base A curated store of information your AI can search in real time. Unlike training data, it can
        Kb             be updated anytime.
    Knowledge Base
                          Real-World Example: Update a price, and the AI immediately gives the correct answer.
                         Combines with: Vector Database, RAG, Guardrails
                         Common mistakes: Dumping unstructured data without organising; Not keeping the KB up to date; Expecting AI to
                         know things not in the KB
                         Reflection: If AI gives outdated info, do you retrain the model or update the knowledge base?


                       RAG Retrieval Augmented Generation. Combines a knowledge base + model so AI answers using YOUR
        Rg             information.
         RAG
                          Real-World Example: Without RAG: generic answers. With RAG: AI searches your handbook, retrieves the
                          section, then generates an answer from your specific policy.
                         Combines with: Knowledge Base, Vector Database, Embedding
                         Common mistakes: Building chatbots without RAG and expecting business knowledge; Confusing RAG with
                         fine-tuning; Not testing retrieval quality before deploying
                         Reflection: Can you explain the difference between an AI that knows general info and one that knows YOUR
                         info?


                       Fine-Tuning Training an existing model on your specific data to change how it behaves. More advanced
         Ft            than RAG, but powerful for specialised outputs.
      Fine-Tuning
                          Real-World Example: Need an AI that always writes in your brand's exact voice? Fine-tuning on hundreds of
                          past communications achieves that.
                         Combines with: Training Data, Model, Parameters
                         Common mistakes: Using fine-tuning when RAG would suffice; Fine-tuning on too little data; Not evaluating
                         fine-tuning vs. RAG first
                         Reflection: If you need AI to sound exactly like your brand every time, would you choose RAG or fine-tuning?



     Checkpoint: You should now be able to: Distinguish training data from a knowledge base; Explain when to use RAG
     vs. fine-tuning; Understand embeddings and vector databases




                                                                     6
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements



 Group 3: Intelligence Layer
 The layer between the raw model and what it produces. Making AI smarter, more contextual, and safer to deploy
 in a real business.




                                                        Figure 5: Group 3 Elements



                       System Prompt Hidden instruction set given before any conversation starts. Gives AI its persona, role,
        Sp             rules, and tone.
    System Prompt
                          Real-World Example: A customer service AI's system prompt: 'You are a helpful support agent. Be concise,
                          friendly, never make up features.'
                         Combines with: Prompt, Guardrails, Memory
                         Common mistakes: Leaving system prompt empty = generic responses; Making it too long and contradictory; Not
                         testing edge cases where AI might ignore it
                         Reflection: If your AI keeps using the wrong tone, which element do you adjust first?


                       Memory AI's ability to remember things across conversations. Without memory, every interaction starts
       Mm              from zero.
       Memory
                          Real-World Example: Without: you tell the AI your business name and goals every time. With: you tell it
                          once, and every future visit it already knows you.
                         Combines with: Context Window, Knowledge Base, RAG
                         Common mistakes: Building chatbots with no memory = impersonal experience; Storing too much and hitting window
                         limits; Not giving users control over what AI remembers
                         Reflection: Would customers prefer an AI that remembers them or starts fresh each time?


                       Multimodal AI that works with images, audio, and video, not just text. Business applications expanding
       Mu              fast.
      Multimodal
                          Real-World Example: Upload a kitchen photo: AI identifies style, suggests improvements, writes a listing
                          description.
                         Combines with: Model, Embedding, Agent
                         Common mistakes: Assuming all models process images; Not compressing images before sending; Ignoring
                         multimodal when it could solve your problem
                         Reflection: What task in your business would be easier if AI could see images?




                                                                     7
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements



                       RLHF Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback. The technique behind why modern AI sounds
        Rh             natural and helpful.
         RLHF
                          Real-World Example: Without RLHF, 'How do I bake a cake?' might dump Wikipedia chemistry. With
                          RLHF: a friendly step-by-step recipe.
                         Combines with: Training Data, Guardrails, Model
                         Common mistakes: Confusing RLHF with prompting techniques; Not understanding why AI sometimes refuses
                         requests; Assuming RLHF makes AI perfectly safe
                         Reflection: Why might an AI refuse to answer a question? Which element is responsible?


                       Guardrails Safety boundaries and rules controlling what AI will and will not do. For customer-facing AI,
        Gr             this is not optional.
      Guardrails
                          Real-World Example: Banking AI without guardrails: 'Invest your life savings in crypto!' With guardrails:
                          'Never give specific investment advice.'
                         Combines with: System Prompt, Human-in-the-Loop, RAG
                         Common mistakes: Deploying customer AI without guardrails; Making guardrails too restrictive; Not testing with
                         adversarial inputs
                         Reflection: If AI said something inappropriate to a customer, do you blame the model or the guardrails?



     Checkpoint: You should now be able to: Write effective system prompts; Design AI with appropriate guardrails;
     Understand RLHF and multimodal capabilities




 Group 4: Models & Providers
 The engine room: the actual AI models you build on. Most people spend all their time here but should not. Models
 are important, but just one piece of the system.




                                                         Figure 6: Group 4 Elements




                                                                     8
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements



                       GPT OpenAI's versatile flagship. Excels at general-purpose tasks. GPT-4 for strong reasoning;
        Gp             GPT-4o-mini for cost-effective everyday tasks.
         GPT
                          Real-World Example: Customer support chatbot: GPT-4 gives strong reasoning. Simple FAQ: GPT-4o-mini
                          at a fraction of the cost.
                         Combines with: API, SDK, Context Window
                         Common mistakes: Using GPT-4 for everything when mini suffices; Not understanding GPT-4 vs. GPT-4o vs. mini;
                         Assuming GPT is always best
                         Reflection: Can you name a task where GPT would NOT be the best choice?


                       Claude Anthropic's model. Exceptional at long documents and nuanced reasoning. Context windows up to
         Cl            200K tokens.
        Claude
                          Real-World Example: Analyse a 50-page legal contract for risks: feed the entire document at once and get
                          thorough analysis.
                         Combines with: MCP, Context Window, API
                         Common mistakes: Using Claude where speed matters more than nuance; Not leveraging the long context window;
                         Assuming Claude can not handle creative tasks
                         Reflection: What task benefits most from reading an entire 50-page document at once?


                       Gemini Google's model with deep Google Workspace integration. If your business runs on Google, Gemini
       Gm              offers seamless connectivity.
        Gemini
                          Real-World Example: Your team lives in Google Workspace. Gemini reads your Docs, analyses Sheets,
                          drafts Gmail emails.
                         Combines with: API, Multimodal, Model
                         Common mistakes: Overlooking Gemini if you are in Google's ecosystem; Not exploring its multimodal capabilities;
                         Assuming it is just another ChatGPT
                         Reflection: If your business uses Google Workspace daily, how could Gemini's integration help?


                       Llama Meta's open-source model. Run it yourself, modify it, deploy on your own infrastructure. Full
         Ll            control, no vendor lock-in.
        Llama
                          Real-World Example: Healthcare company can not send patient data to OpenAI. With Llama on their own
                          servers, data never leaves.
                         Combines with: Fine-Tuning, Parameters, Model
                         Common mistakes: Assuming open-source means lower quality; Underestimating hosting infrastructure costs; Not
                         considering Llama when privacy is required
                         Reflection: When would running your own AI model on your own servers be worth the effort?


                       Mistral Lean, efficient European alternative. Strong performance at smaller sizes. Excellent value per
        Ms             dollar.
        Mistral
                          Real-World Example: The efficient sedan of AI: not the flashiest, but excellent value per mile.
                         Combines with: Parameters, API, Model
                         Common mistakes: Dismissing Mistral because it is less famous; Not benchmarking against bigger models;
                         Overlooking for European data compliance
                         Reflection: When might a smaller, efficient model outperform a larger one for your use case?




                                                                     9
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements



                       Grok xAI's model with real-time X (Twitter) data access. Unique advantage for trend analysis and sentiment
        Gk             monitoring.
         Grok
                          Real-World Example: Know what people say about your brand right now, not last month.
                         Combines with: API, Training Data, Model
                         Common mistakes: Assuming Grok is just another chatbot; Not leveraging real-time data access; Relying on it for
                         deep accuracy over speed
                         Reflection: If you needed real-time brand sentiment, which model and why?



     Checkpoint: You should now be able to: Compare GPT, Claude, Gemini, Llama, Mistral, and Grok; Choose the right
     model for a given business need; Understand open-source vs. proprietary trade-offs




 Group 5: Infrastructure & Connectivity
 The connectors that make AI actually useful in the real world. Without these, AI is just a website you visit. With
 these, it is a system that works for you.




                                                         Figure 7: Group 5 Elements



                       API Application Programming Interface. The bridge between AI models and everything else. A way to call
        Ap             an AI model programmatically.
         API
                          Real-World Example: Customer fills in a contact form: API call sends their message to AI, gets a response,
                          sends it back in under 2 seconds.
                         Combines with: Endpoints, SDK, Function Calling
                         Common mistakes: Confusing APIs with the AI model itself; Not handling API errors and rate limits; Hard-coding
                         API keys in source code
                         Reflection: Can you explain the difference between chatting with AI on a website vs. calling it through an API?




                                                                     10
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements



                       Webhooks One system automatically notifies another when something happens. The webhook is the starting
       Wh              gun.
      Webhooks
                          Real-World Example: Customer completes a purchase on Shopify. Webhook fires to Make.com, triggers AI
                          workflow: personalised thank-you email, CRM update, follow-up task.
                         Combines with: Workflows, API, Endpoints
                         Common mistakes: Using polling instead of webhooks for real-time events; Not securing webhook endpoints;
                         Assuming webhooks guarantee delivery
                         Reflection: If your AI automation never starts, do you check the prompt or the webhook?


                       Endpoints The specific URL address where an API lives. Like a phone number: dial the right one and you
         Ep            are connected.
       Endpoints
                          Real-World Example: When connecting tools like Make or Zapier, you constantly encounter endpoints.
                         Combines with: API, Webhooks, SDK
                         Common mistakes: Confusing endpoints with the full API; Not updating endpoints when API versions change;
                         Hard-coding endpoint URLs
                         Reflection: If your integration stops after an API update, which element is likely the cause?


                       MCP Model Context Protocol. An emerging standard allowing AI models to connect to external tools
        Mc             consistently. Think: universal power plug for AI.
         MCP
                          Real-World Example: Before MCP, every AI-tool connection was custom-built. MCP creates one universal
                          standard: plug your agent into any MCP tool and it just works.
                         Combines with: Function Calling, API, Agent
                         Common mistakes: Ignoring MCP because it is new; Confusing MCP with a specific tool rather than a protocol; Not
                         exploring MCP-compatible tools
                         Reflection: Why could a universal AI-tool standard transform how agents are built?


                       Function Calling The ability for AI to call external tools or APIs during a conversation. This is what lets AI
         Fc            actually DO things, not just say things.
    Function Calling
                          Real-World Example: 'Book me a meeting with Sarah next Tuesday.' Function calling enables: check
                          calendar, call booking API, send confirmation email.
                         Combines with: API, MCP, Agent
                         Common mistakes: Expecting AI to take actions without function calling; Not defining functions clearly enough;
                         Forgetting to handle function call errors
                         Reflection: If your AI can only generate text but never does anything, what is missing?


                       SDK Software Development Kit. Pre-built libraries making it easier to build with AI APIs.
         Sk               Real-World Example: Instead of 50 lines of raw HTTP code to call an AI model, the OpenAI SDK does it in
          SDK
                          5 lines.
                         Combines with: API, Endpoints, Function Calling
                         Common mistakes: Writing raw API calls when an SDK exists; Not keeping SDKs updated; Assuming you can not
                         use SDKs if you are not a developer
                         Reflection: Why is using an SDK like using a recipe kit instead of sourcing every ingredient?



     Checkpoint: You should now be able to: Explain APIs, webhooks, and endpoints; Understand function calling and
     MCP; Know when to use SDKs vs. direct API calls




                                                                     11
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements



 Group 6: Agents & Automation
 Where AI stops being a tool you use and becomes a system that works for you. This is the biggest leap in the entire
 table. From chatbot to employee.




                                                         Figure 8: Group 6 Elements



                       Agent An AI system that perceives its environment, makes decisions, and takes action. The leap from tool to
        Ag             digital employee.
        Agent
                          Real-World Example: Customer emails about an order. Agent looks up the order, sees it is delayed, checks
                          courier API, drafts personalised response, offers discount. All without human intervention.
                         Combines with: Orchestration, Tool Use, Workflows
                         Common mistakes: Calling any chatbot an 'agent'; Building agents without guardrails or oversight; Expecting agents
                         to be perfect from day one
                         Reflection: What is the difference between a chatbot that answers questions and an agent that solves problems?


                       Orchestration The system that manages and coordinates multiple agents or steps. If an agent is a musician,
        Or             orchestration is the conductor.
     Orchestration
                          Real-World Example: Content pipeline: research agent gathers data, writing agent drafts, editing agent
                          polishes, publishing agent posts. Orchestration ensures the right order and failure handling.
                         Combines with: Multi-Agent, Workflows, Human-in-the-Loop
                         Common mistakes: Building multiple agents without orchestration; Not handling failure scenarios; Over-engineering
                         when simple workflows suffice
                         Reflection: If three agents needed to work together, what goes wrong without orchestration?


                       Workflows The sequence of automated steps producing a business outcome. Build workflows, not one-off
        Wf             prompts.
      Workflows
                          Real-World Example: Lead comes in: 1) AI scores it, 2) drafts personalised email, 3) queued for review, 4) if
                          approved, sent automatically, 5) CRM updated. 30 minutes becomes 30 seconds.
                         Combines with: Webhooks, Agent, Human-in-the-Loop
                         Common mistakes: Automating processes you have not manually tested; Building too-rigid workflows; Not
                         monitoring performance after deployment
                         Reflection: Can you identify one repetitive process that could become a workflow?




                                                                     12
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements



                       Multi-Agent System Multiple specialised AI agents working together. One researches, one writes, one
        Ma             edits. This replaces entire processes, not just single tasks.
      Multi-Agent
       System             Real-World Example: Real estate: Agent 1 searches listings, Agent 2 analyses market data, Agent 3
                          generates comparison reports, Agent 4 drafts client emails.
                         Combines with: Agent, Orchestration, Tool Use
                         Common mistakes: Building one do-everything agent instead of specialists; Not defining clear boundaries between
                         agents; Needing more robust error handling
                         Reflection: If building an AI team for your business, what specialised agents would you create?


                       Human-in-the-Loop The point where a human reviews or approves before automation continues. Not a
         Hi            weakness but a design choice.
   Human-in-the-Loo
          p               Real-World Example: AI drafts refund responses. Before any email goes out, human reviews and clicks
                          Approve. Over time, auto-approve small refunds, only flag large ones.
                         Combines with: Workflows, Guardrails, Agent
                         Common mistakes: Automating everything without checkpoints; Making review too burdensome; Not gradually
                         reducing oversight as system proves reliable
                         Reflection: At what point in your workflows would you insist on human approval?


                       Tool Use An agent's ability to use external tools: search engines, calculators, databases, apps. Without tool
        Tu             use, an agent is just a fast chatbot.
       Tool Use
                          Real-World Example: Agent with tool use can: search web for stock prices, calculate compound interest,
                          look up CRM records, send Slack messages.
                         Combines with: Function Calling, MCP, API
                         Common mistakes: Building agents without connecting tools; Giving agents tools without proper permissions; Not
                         defining which tools for which tasks
                         Reflection: If an agent could only generate text, not search/calculate/send, how useful would it really be?



     Checkpoint: You should now be able to: Distinguish chatbots from agents; Design workflows with
     human-in-the-loop; Plan multi-agent systems with orchestration




 Group 7: No-Code Builder Tools
 The builder tools that let you create AI systems without writing code. If you are not a developer, this is your
 workshop. Every element above becomes drag-and-drop.




                                                                     13
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements


                                                         Figure 9: Group 7 Elements



                       Zapier The original no-code automation platform. 6,000+ app connections, low learning curve.
        Zp                Real-World Example: Set up a Zap: new lead fills form, add to CRM, send welcome email, notify team in
        Zapier
                          Slack. No code.
                         Combines with: Webhooks, API, Workflows
                         Common mistakes: Using Zapier for complex multi-branch logic; Not monitoring task usage (costs scale); Assuming
                         Zapier can do everything a custom build can
                         Reflection: What is one repetitive daily task Zapier could automate in 10 minutes?


                       Make Built for complex, multi-step workflows. Visual, flexible, handles the logic that real AI systems
        Mk             require.
        Make
                          Real-World Example: Build a scenario: receive webhook on order, check purchase history, AI generates
                          upsell recommendation, send email, log in analytics.
                         Combines with: Webhooks, API, Workflows
                         Common mistakes: Using Zapier when Make's complexity is needed; Not using Make's error handling features;
                         Building overly complex scenarios hard to maintain
                         Reflection: If your automation needs branching logic, which tool do you reach for?


                       n8n Open-source automation. More technical than Zapier/Make, but runs on your own infrastructure. Full
        N8             control, no per-task pricing.
         n8n
                          Real-World Example: Process customer data through AI without sending it to third parties. n8n on your
                          server: data never leaves.
                         Combines with: API, Webhooks, Workflows
                         Common mistakes: Choosing n8n without technical skills for self-hosting; Not budgeting for server costs;
                         Underestimating maintenance burden
                         Reflection: When would self-hosted automation be worth the extra technical effort?


                       VoiceFlow No-code platform for building AI agents and conversational interfaces. Drag-and-drop design.
         Vf               Real-World Example: Customer service chatbot: drag conversation blocks, connect to knowledge base, set
      VoiceFlow
                          up fallbacks, design the journey visually. Deploy to your website in minutes.
                         Combines with: Agent, Knowledge Base, Guardrails
                         Common mistakes: Using VoiceFlow for non-conversational automations; Not testing with real users;
                         Overcomplicating conversation design
                         Reflection: Could you design a simple customer service flow on paper? That is what VoiceFlow lets you build
                         digitally.


                       Flowise Open-source, no-code builder for LLM applications. Build RAG pipelines, custom agents, chatbots
        Fw             with a visual interface.
        Flowise
                          Real-World Example: Chatbot that knows your documents: visually connect document loader, text splitter,
                          embedding model, vector database, LLM. Each is a drag-and-drop block.
                         Combines with: RAG, Vector Database, Agent
                         Common mistakes: Confusing Flowise with a general automation tool; Not understanding underlying concepts before
                         building visually; Self-hosting without proper security
                         Reflection: To build a chatbot that knows your documents, what elements would you chain together?




                                                                     14
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements



                       Cursor AI-powered code editor. Describe what you want in plain English and it writes the code.
         Cr               Real-World Example: Need a custom API endpoint? In Cursor: 'Create a Python API that takes customer
        Cursor
                          feedback, sends it to GPT-4 for categorisation, and returns the category.'
                         Combines with: SDK, API, Model
                         Common mistakes: Assuming Cursor outputs are always correct; Not learning basic concepts to evaluate output;
                         Using Cursor when no-code would solve it faster
                         Reflection: If you could describe a feature in English and have it built, what would you create?



     Checkpoint: You should now be able to: Choose between Zapier, Make, and n8n; Build conversational AI with
     VoiceFlow; Create RAG pipelines with Flowise; Use Cursor for custom builds




 Group 8: Business Layer
 The business layer where everything connects back to value. If it does not serve a use case, deliver ROI, or fit your
 strategy, it is a toy, not a tool.




                                                        Figure 10: Group 8 Elements



                       Use Case The specific business problem you are solving with AI. Must come before picking tools. Start with
        Uc             the problem, not the product.
       Use Case
                          Real-World Example: Bad: 'We need to use AI.' Good: 'Support spends 20 hrs/week on 15 repeated
                          questions. AI handles 80% = 16 hrs saved.'
                         Combines with: ROI, AI Strategy, AI Stack
                         Common mistakes: Starting with a tool instead of a problem; Defining use cases too vague to measure; Building
                         solutions for problems that do not exist
                         Reflection: Can you write three specific AI-solvable problems with measurable success criteria?




                                                                     15
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements



                       ROI Return on Investment. The only real reason to implement AI. If you can not articulate time saved,
         Ri            revenue added, or cost reduced, rethink before you build.
          ROI
                          Real-World Example: Automate lead qualification: before 2 hrs/day manual sorting, after 15 min reviewing
                          AI-screened leads. 1.75 hrs/day x 220 work days = 385 hrs/year. At $50/hr = $19,250 annual savings.
                         Combines with: Use Case, AI Strategy, Workflows
                         Common mistakes: Building AI without defining ROI measurement; Counting only time saved, not quality improved;
                         Not tracking actual ROI after implementation
                         Reflection: How would you calculate the exact dollar value of automating one process?


                       Prompt Engineering The craft of designing prompts that reliably produce the output you need.
         Pe            Highest-leverage thing a non-technical AI builder can learn.
        Prompt
      Engineering         Real-World Example: 'Write a sales email' vs. 'Write 200-word email to SaaS founders whose teams waste
                          10+ hrs/week on manual data entry. Highlight 3-day free trial. Confident not pushy. CTA to book demo.'
                         Combines with: Prompt, System Prompt, Temperature
                         Common mistakes: Treating it as one-time instead of iterative; Not documenting successful prompts; Believing it
                         replaces the need for good data and systems
                         Reflection: Can you take a prompt you use regularly and improve it with specific constraints?


                       AI Stack Your total combination of AI tools, models, and systems working together. Like a tech stack but
         As            for intelligence.
        AI Stack
                          Real-World Example: Claude for documents, GPT-4o-mini for chat, Pinecone for vectors, Make for
                          workflows, VoiceFlow for chatbot, Google Sheets for data. Each piece has a job.
                         Combines with: Model, No-Code Tools, Infrastructure
                         Common mistakes: Adopting tools randomly without understanding fit; Having overlapping tools doing the same
                         thing; Not documenting so team does not know what is where
                         Reflection: Can you map every AI tool you use? Are there gaps or redundancies?


                       AI Avatars Digital personas built on AI. Growing fast for content creation, customer service, brand
         Av            building.
       AI Avatars
                          Real-World Example: Fitness brand creates AI avatar of their head coach. Customers chat 24/7 for advice.
                          One coach, infinite availability.
                         Combines with: Model, System Prompt, Memory
                         Common mistakes: Thinking avatars are just chatbots with a profile picture; Not investing in personality and
                         consistency; Ignoring ethical considerations
                         Reflection: Could your business benefit from an AI rep that is always available to customers?


                       AI Strategy Deliberate, sequenced plan for how AI integrates into your business over time. Without
         St            strategy: random tool collection. With strategy: genuine competitive advantage.
      AI Strategy
                          Real-World Example: Random: try ChatGPT one week, build a chatbot next. Strategic: Phase 1 automate
                          lead qualification, Phase 2 deploy support agent, Phase 3 multi-agent content system. Each phase builds on the
                          last.
                         Combines with: Use Case, ROI, AI Stack
                         Common mistakes: Confusing 'using AI tools' with having an AI strategy; Not setting timelines and milestones;
                         Building capabilities that do not connect to business goals
                         Reflection: If you wrote a 12-month AI strategy, what would be your first three priorities?




                                                                      16
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements



     Checkpoint: You should now be able to: Define specific, measurable AI use cases; Calculate ROI for AI
     implementations; Design a phased AI strategy; Map your AI stack




 Part 3: Compounds
 Individual elements are powerful, but their true value emerges when they combine into compounds. In chemistry,
 hydrogen and oxygen form water. In AI, Tokens, Prompts, Models, RAG, Vector Databases, and Workflows
 combine to form a Custom AI Assistant. Understanding compounds is how you move from knowing about AI to
 building with AI.




                                              Figure 11: How Elements Combine Into Compounds




 Compound 1: The Custom AI Assistant
 Formula: Token + Prompt + Model + RAG + Vector DB + Knowledge Base + Guardrails + System Prompt

 This is the most common compound in AI business. A custom AI assistant that knows your company's
 information, speaks in your brand's voice, and stays within safe boundaries. It is the backbone of customer
 support, internal helpdesks, and sales assistants. Without RAG, the AI only knows general information. Without
 guardrails, it might say something damaging. Without a system prompt, it has no consistent personality. Each
 element plays an essential role in making the compound work reliably.



 Compound 2: The Automated Lead Pipeline
 Formula: Webhook + Workflow + Agent + Function Calling + API + Human-in-the-Loop

 A lead fills in a form. A webhook triggers a workflow. An AI agent scores the lead using function calling to check
 the CRM via API. If the score is high, it drafts a personalised email. A human reviews (Human-in-the-Loop),
 approves, and the email sends automatically. What used to take 30 minutes of manual work now takes 30 seconds,


                                                                   17
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements


 with higher quality and zero missed follow-ups. This compound turns AI from a conversation tool into a revenue
 engine.



 Compound 3: The Content Factory
 Formula: Multi-Agent + Orchestration + Prompt Engineering + Make/n8n + Knowledge Base + AI Strategy

 A research agent gathers data from your knowledge base. A writing agent drafts content using prompt engineering
 best practices. An editing agent polishes for brand voice. Orchestration coordinates the sequence. Make or n8n
 handles the automation triggers. Your AI strategy ensures the content aligns with business goals. The result:
 scaled, consistent, high-quality content production that would require an entire team to match manually.




 Part 4: Quick Reference
 Use this section as a rapid lookup for any element. The table below lists all 48 elements with their symbol, group,
 and a one-line definition. Refer back to the detailed element cards in Part 2 for full descriptions, examples, and
 combinations.


   Sym                Element           Group                                                Definition

    Tk       Token                        G1      How AI reads text; affects cost/speed

    Md       Model                        G1      The core AI engine

    Pr       Prompt                       G1      Your instructions; 80% of output quality

    Cw       Context Window               G1      How much the model can remember at once

    Tp       Temperature                  G1      Creativity vs. predictability control

    Pm       Parameters                   G1      Internal settings shaping model thinking

    Td       Training Data                G2      What the model learned during creation

    Em       Embedding                    G2      Converts text to meaning-capturing numbers

    Vd       Vector Database              G2      Stores and searches embeddings

    Kb       Knowledge Base               G2      Curated info store AI can search in real time

    Rg       RAG                          G2      Combines knowledge base + model for your data

    Ft       Fine-Tuning                  G2      Trains a model on your specific data

    Sp       System Prompt                G3      Hidden instructions setting AI personality

   Mm        Memory                       G3      Remembers across separate conversations

    Mu       Multimodal                   G3      AI that works with images, audio, video

    Rh       RLHF                         G3      Why AI sounds natural (human feedback training)

    Gr       Guardrails                   G3      Safety boundaries for AI behaviour

    Gp       GPT                          G4      OpenAI's versatile model family

    Cl       Claude                       G4      Anthropic's model; great for long docs

   Gm        Gemini                       G4      Google's model; ecosystem integration

     Ll      Llama                        G4      Meta's open-source model; full control


                                                                       18
Optitude AI | The Periodic Table of AI Elements


   Sym                 Element          Group                                                  Definition

    Ms       Mistral                      G4      Lean, efficient European alternative

    Gk       Grok                         G4      xAI's model; real-time social data

    Ap       API                          G5      Bridge between AI and other systems

   Wh        Webhooks                     G5      Automatic notifications between systems

    Ep       Endpoints                    G5      URL address where an API lives

    Mc       MCP                          G5      Universal standard for AI-tool connections

    Fc       Function Calling             G5      Lets AI call external tools and take action

    Sk       SDK                          G5      Pre-built libraries for easier AI building

    Ag       Agent                        G6      AI that perceives, decides, and acts

    Or       Orchestration                G6      Conductor coordinating multiple agents

    Wf       Workflows                    G6      Sequence of automated steps for outcomes

    Ma       Multi-Agent System           G6      Multiple specialised agents working together

    Hi       Human-in-the-Loop            G6      Human review checkpoint in automation

    Tu       Tool Use                     G6      Agent's ability to use external tools

    Zp       Zapier                       G7      No-code automation; 6,000+ apps

    Mk       Make                         G7      Visual builder for complex workflows

    N8       n8n                          G7      Open-source automation; self-hosted

    Vf       VoiceFlow                    G7      No-code builder for conversational AI

    Fw       Flowise                      G7      Open-source visual builder for LLM apps

    Cr       Cursor                       G7      AI-powered code editor; describe and build

    Uc       Use Case                     G8      Specific business problem you're solving

    Ri       ROI                          G8      Return on investment; the real reason

    Pe       Prompt Engineering           G8      Craft of designing effective prompts

    As       AI Stack                     G8      Total combination of AI tools and systems

    Av       AI Avatars                   G8      Digital persona built on AI

    St       AI Strategy                  G8      Deliberate plan for AI business integration




                                                                        19
